We're not evolving

Evolution is a common refrain these days, and rightly so. Darwin's legacy is one
of the most potent ideas ever. It's a crushingly powerful core explanation of
biology alone, and beyond that, the core mechanisms of reproduction, variation,
and selection apply equally well to all sorts of other domains. Technology,
memes, and capitalism are a few oft-quoted examples, but they're just the
beginning.

We can take it a bit overboard, though, especially when we start to wonder how
we're evolving based on technology and the modern world. We don't yet have
square, keyboard-friendly fingers, or ears with perfect earbud-shaped holes, but
are we evolving ever shorter attention spans, more Asperger's syndrome, or faster
video game twitch reflexes?

No, we're not. Sure, of course, technology and other modernities affect us. Our
brains are amazingly plastic, especially when we're young, so growing up on
iPads and Facebook and video chat leaves a mark. However, our genes themselves
are not (yet) evolving and changing in response to the modern environment. It's
a seductive idea, but honestly, it's just plain silly.

(Yes, [epigenetics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epigenetics) is all the rage
these days, and it incorporates the environment, and
[it's even hereditary](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transgenerational_epigenetics)...but
it still just turns our _existing_ genes on and off and halfway in between.
Epigenetics still doesn't provide any evidence of
[Lamarckian style inheritance](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lamarckism) of
skills you acquire during your lifetime, and no one expects it ever will.)

First, evolution takes a _long_time: thousands, even millions of generations to
see real changes in a phenotype. All of recorded history is still just a couple
hundred generations old. Technology and other new facets of our environment may
affect us profoundly on the nurture side, but not so much on the nature side.

Second, unlike other species, we've intercepted two of evolution's three legs,
selection and reproduction, and thrown them wildly off course. Modern medicine
may not be perfect, but it does ensure that most babies survive into their
adult, childbearing years, regardless of their innate health or fitness. That
throws selection out the window.

Similarly, you probably know at least a few happy couples who have chosen not to
have children. It still amazes that we've managed to decouple sex from
procreation so effectively. Widespread birth control means that most of us
choose how many children to have, or whether to have them at all, as opposed to
leaving it up to our biological fertility. So much for the reproduction leg!

That leaves variation, which is still largely intact. We may have IVF,
surrogates, and adoption, but at the end of the day we still need a sperm and an
egg to randomly mix DNA to make a baby. They also still use good old RNA
transcription, that tried and true process that's amazingly good, all things
considered, but still lets an occasional mutation slip through.

It would be fun to think of how technology and other parts of modern society are
literally changing us. Our kids always seem so different from us, right?
Generation gaps seem to be growing wider and wider.

It's not true, though. Evolution is good, but not that good, or that fast, and
it doesn't matter since we've pretty much pulled the plug on it anyway.

The real conclusion isn't that we can see ourselves evolving over history, but
we _can_ watch evolution happen in real time in entirely new environments.
Startups often last for just a handful of years. Tech products have even shorter
lifespans. "Superbugs" often live for less than a day, which lets them evolve
resistence to antibiotics by cranking out hundreds or even thousands of
generations in just one year. Internet memes spread like wildfire seemingly
overnight. Culture, politics, art, and many other parts of modern life evolve at
a speed we can appreciate and leave artifacts we can see and touch.

If you want to see evolution in action, that's where it's at. Forget the
pseudoscience; we humans aren't evolving right now, and that's ok. There's so
much of it going on everywhere else!
