46631

So, there's this feeling.

When you've had little kids for long enough, you get used to the fact that your time is not your own. These little, helpless creatures depend on you 24/7. You're constantly wrangling them, managing their moods and energy, schlepping their endless stuff, keeping them from destroying everything within reach...and that's when they're happy and well behaved. Which is maybe half the time. If you're lucky.

When you've lived like that for years, until it's second nature and you can't remember any other way, and then you take a trip on your own, you feel...giddy. Dangerously free. Everything is quicker, easier, lighter. Time expands until it's endless. The thrill is almost illicit, especially at the beginning: you startle constantly, looking around for the kids, scared that you've somehow left them in the car or the plane. That fades over time, but the freedom, the dangerous exhilaraton, remains.

Want to go somewhere? You just...go. No negotiation, no five minute warning, no gathering five bags and ten stuffies and hundreds of crayons. No cleaning up messes, no planning the next three snack breaks. You stand up, grab your bag, and go. It feels like a cheat code for life, like someone might show up at any time and tap you on the shoulder and say, no fair, you can't do that. Try again on kid difficulty level.

After kids, when you travel alone, airport security is darn near relaxing. Just your own stuff? Nothing else? That's...too easy.  Watching other families is a guilty thrill. You know the crying and strollers and spilling everywhere intimately; you've lived it too. You want to hug them and say, I know. I know. You're not alone. And then you take off your shoes, walk through the metal detector, and the dangerous freedom hits again.

There's a dark side, of course. The loneliness doesn't hit immediately, but when it does, it hits like a sledgehammer. Phone calls and texted pictures don't cut it for long.

Still...this feeling. It's a drug. If I could bottle this feeling and sell it, I'd make a fortune.
