Majestic  

_([Published on Poindexter](http://www.poindexteronline.com/site/2003/05/majesticby_ryan_barrett_stanfo.html);
[back to writing](/writing))_

It's hard to eat cereal when the milk won't stay in the bowl. I
mean, you never think about it, but you really take for granted
that it just stays put. The whole process is automatic. Spoon goes
down, spoon goes up, swallow, repeat. You might have to think a
little when it's almost gone and you have to chase down the last
clump of cereal, but that's about it. So when the milk decides it's
not satisfied with a cardboard-carton-and-white-crockery life, when
it decides to float up out of the bowl and see what's going on in
the world, well, it puts a whole new spin on breakfast.

Of course, NASA doesn't let us spend every morning chasing down
rogue milk blobs with our spoons. We're much too valuable. So we
have special cereal eating contraptions, sort of like upside-down
ice cream cones with a straw at the top. I took one apart once, to
see what was inside, and the straw flares out at the bottom so it
covers a good chunk of the bowl. I'm not sure how that helps, but
they work most of the time so I don't worry about it. Still, they
aren't very well sealed, so every now and then a few drops of milk
will leap to freedom and then we have to break out the Dust Devil.
I imagine the lucky droplets yelling back to their brothers and
sisters still inside, trying to tell them as much as they can about
life on the outside before they're sucked into the black oblivion
of the vacuum.

I'm not feeling particularly poetic this morning, though. Mostly
I'm just hungry. I hear a clang on the other side of the porthole
and look up from my cereal to see Ed float into the dining room. We
call it the banquet hall. It's about the farthest you can get from
a real banquet hall, but 200 miles above the earth's surface, as
the joke goes, it's luxury cuisine. The banquet hall itself is
cramped. It fits three people comfortably in the eating area, and
only one in the kitchen proper, where the stove and microwave and
refrigerator are. There, everything you need to cook food is in a
pouch somewhere among the metal security handles and squares of
velcro.

"'Morning," he says.

"'Morning," I reply.

"What'd you have?" He glances at my cereal machine.

"Granola. We're out of Frosted Flakes," I reply. He smiles
knowingly. Two floors below us, in the vast warehouse of storage
area C, there's enough food to feed the four of us for years.
Decades maybe. No one looks forward to going down there when
something runs out, though, so we keep a shopping list under a
magnet on the fridge.

"Didn't seem worth it," I say. "It's only a few more days."

"Ah, ah, but have you ever thought about how long a few days really
is? I mean, look at the mayfly. Its lifespan is, what, three days?
If we were mayflies, it'd be a lifetime before we had to go back.
We'd have our whole lives ahead of us."

I groan. Ed pulls himself over to the kitchen and grabs the Froot
Loops from a pouch below the microwave. Sara and Jenn emerge from
the porthole. Jenn's hair is wild, and Sara rubs sleep from her
eyes. We mumble our greetings. Jenn makes a beeline for the cereal
pouch as Ed floats out of the kitchen.

"Where are the Frosted Flakes?" Her tone is accusatory. I grin.

"We finished them yesterday," I say. "Unless you want to do the
shopping?"

"No," she grumbles. She puts a Pop Tart in the toaster and searches
for a box of Cheerios for Sara. Minutes later, we're eating our
breakfast in silence.

We've been busy the last few days, finishing experiments and
packing up equipment. Our shuttle, the USS Vanguard, has been in
orbit for nearly four months now. Topside, the desk geeks call it.
Sara is the chemist and geologist. She analyzes the samples our
rover brings back from the moon. Jenn is the aeronautics and
astronautics engineer. We call her R.S., for rocket scientist. Ed's
the mechanic. He's also the class clown. He's heard all the jokes
about the clumsy mechanic, but he still laughs at them. Jenn calls
him Kramer, after the character on Seinfeld. Me, I'm just a guy who
got lucky. I was a paper pusher in the navigation department, a
desk geek. It took me ten years to sack up and get myself into
decent shape so I could try out for flight crew. This is my first
real mission, and now it's almost over.

Jenn finishes her breakfast first. She drops her wrapper in the
trash chute and disappears into the porthole. Moments later, we
hear rhythmic grunts and short, fleshy thumps from down below.

"She's at it again," Sara says. She grimaces and glances at Ed.
"Hey, is that a good idea? I mean, what's it like, being back on
the ground after this much time in zero G's?"

"It kicks your ass." Ed smiles. "All your muscles atrophy up here.
Most people can't even walk their first day back, so they stick you
on crutches, or in a wheelchair if you've got it really bad. You
never see it on the news because by the time you see the flight
crew, they've got their land legs again."

His smile broadens. "And besides, they gotta keep up the astronaut
image, right? Crew cuts and ponytails and white teeth and American
flags. That's why I became an astronaut, anyway. Ah! We're living
the American Dream!"

"Yeah," Sara says, half paying attention. "Bob, you've known Jenn
longer than I have. Was she always like that?"

"Like what?" I ask. I know what she means.

"Like...you know. A gym rat. A hardbody."

"Oh. Yeah, probably." Jenn is in terrific shape, I think to myself.
"Before she applied to NASA flight training, she was in
bodybuilding competitions. Crazy diets, steroids, the whole nine
yards. She showed me pictures from one of the competitions, but
she's softened a lot since then."

"Wow," Sara gapes. "That's crazy. I have trouble getting myself to
the gym at all, and I can't stand working out here. She must love
it."

Exercise in zero gravity is a funny thing. We have to maintain a
certain level of physical fitness, but we can't run or bike or lift
weights or anything. There's no gravity to work against. So we have
to improvise. Our gym consists of five elastic bands, a few
contraptions mounted on giant springs, and a sort of stair-climber
one of the NASA robot designers threw together in his spare time.
It's a life saver, actually, since most of our requirements measure
overall fitness and not strength.

"Yeah," I reply. "I think her personality is part of it. I mean,
she's not a militant feminist or anything. She doesn't even like
feminists. But she's always been really aware of expectations and
everything. I think that's part of why she tried out for flight
training."

"Yeah, I can see that." Sara chews her cereal slowly. "Geez, I
haven't done anything like that. I'm so boring."

I look down and consider my cereal. "But you have a family," I say.
"That's more than she can say."

"Yeah," she sighs, "but everyone does that. Most people, anyway."

"Hey, look out the window," Ed says. "That little blue ball way out
there is the earth. How many people you think get to see that? Ah!
Ah, ah. I could count them on two hands. Well, maybe four. Um, that
makes...oh, shit. Let me see your hands, Bob."

I laugh and move my hands behind my back. Ed glides over to the
kitchen and dumps his empty cereal machine into the sanitizer. He
launches off the stove and down through the porthole, spinning
slowly. Sara and I munch on our cereal in silence. The day has just
begun, and already we're thinking it. Touchdown in T-minus 53
hours.

Sara grabs the cereal out of my hands and throws both of our cereal
machines into the sanitizer. She grabs my hand and pulls me toward
the porthole. I laugh. We sink down the main shaft and through the
bowels of the shuttle, past the airlock, the bunks, the lab, and
the machine room where our air and water is purified. Near the
bottom, we reach a door labeled "STORAGE/C." We slip through and
Sara pushes it closed behind us until she hears the latch click
shut. She winks at me and pulls her shirt over her head.

Sex in zero gravity is fantastic.

Not that I'm spoiled or anything. Sex on earth is great, too. But
more than anything else, sex in zero G's has made me realize how
much of an effect gravity has on my body. The human body is an
amazing thing. It copes with this burden all the time, this
interminable force pulling down on every piece of bone and tissue,
and yet it manages to get up and walk around and even go to the
market once in a while. It's really a marvelous piece of machinery.
So in zero G's, when that burden is lifted from your shoulders,
well, it's the most liberating feeling in the world and then some.
I don't know the right word to describe it.

I'll never forget the launch. After we left the atmosphere and
earth's gentle tug began to lose its grasp on us, when the big jets
stopped and the blast tanks fell away and the invisible giant
lifted his hand from my chest, I felt free. Completely, utterly
free. Free like I've never felt before. I'm not talking First
Amendment, right-to-bear-arms free here, I'm talking head-spinning,
out-of-body-experience free. Faster-than-a-speeding-bullet,
reach-out-and-touch-the-stars, look-ma-I-can-fly free. Everything
became oddly beautiful. The instrument panels gleamed and the stars
twinkled through the windows and I couldn't stop smiling for days.
The sensation took a long time to fade away.

I'm accustomed to zero G's now. I can move around easily, and I
don't feel like I'm upside down all the time. But when I'm with
Sara, when I'm inside her and I feel her tense up and the waves
crash down and she takes me over the edge, I turn inside out. For a
moment, I escape the flimsy container of my body and fly through
the shuttle and escape out the airlock into the endless night of
space, and the universe isn't big enough to hold me so I tear it
open and fly into the void beyond, and I'm laughing. I feel like I
could laugh forever and it wouldn't be enough. I'm electric. For a
second, for a brief eternity, I feel what I felt during that first
launch. I feel free.

Today, we're in the storage area. The bunks are usually good
enough, and the velcro helps a lot, but sometimes we like to be
unattached. We stash our clothes near the door, push off a metal
shelf, and soar. We spin around each other, out of control. We
laugh. We feel the way eagles would feel if they could mate in the
air. Who knows, maybe they can.

After the tide has come and gone, I let out a sigh. I look down at
Sara. Her head is pressed against my chest, and her hair floats in
a misty halo. I stare, unabashed.

"You're beautiful," I say.

"Hey, stop that. We said this was just for fun, right? No strings
attached. What did you call it, our first time? The Hundred Mile
High Club?"

"No, no, it was purely research," I grin. "I swear, scout's honor.
Part of an experiment I'm doing on the effects of sex in zero G's.
I've got the official papers and everything, they're in my bag."

She swats me on the cheek. "Riiight. Maybe I should dump your pants
down the trash chute. We could do an experiment on the effects of
you without clothes in zero G's."

I laugh. Her voice softens. "Thank you. I appreciate it, I really
do. God, I can't believe we'll be back on the ground in two days. I
could be eating In-N-Out in less than 48 hours, you realize that?"

"Yeah," I say. "Thank god for that. I won't miss the food topside,
that's for sure. It's so far away, though, it's tough to imagine.
You looking forward to it?"

She pauses. Her eyes are unfocused, and she presses her mouth into
a straight line. "Yeah, I guess. I mean, yes, of course I am.
Aren't you?"

"Sure," I say. "It feels like we've been up here forever. It'll be
great to see everyone again, right?"

I realize my mistake immediately. Shit, I think. She looks away.

"I'm sorry, Sara. I didn't mean it like that. It'll be good to see
everyone else, though. Won't it?"

She closes her eyes and swallows, hard. "Yeah, of course. God, I
still can't believe it. A month before our first launch date. I
mean, he was acting a little strange, but whenever I asked, he just
chalked it up to mid-life crisis. I did too, until I came home to
an empty garage and a note taped to the front door. Hell of a
mid-life crisis."

She breaks off. Her breath comes in shudders. After a moment, she
continues.

"It's not just that, either. Janey starts school...um, the 19th, I
think. So she'll be out of the house a few weeks from now. And
Amanda will be there when we land, but she's staying at A&M for the
summer. The house is going to be so empty."

She buries her head under my chin. I rub her back in slow circles.

"Relax, hon. It'll be ok. It's not like Janey's leaving forever. I
mean, it's only fifty miles or so. You can see her on the weekends,
and besides, you and Amanda talk every day, right?"

She nods.

"Listen, when she starts school, we'll throw you a party. I'll get
everyone in flight crew to come. It'll be great. I'll get a cake
that says, \`Congratulations! You Finally Got the Kids Out of the
House!'"

She smiles faintly. I brush a stray wisp of hair from her face and
tuck it behind her ear. I'm trying to think of something else to
say, something to cheer her up, when we hear the intercom buzz.
It's the incoming buzz, which means ground control has sent us a
fax. There are no telephones in the shuttle because the roundtrip
time for a radio signal is eight minutes. So they fax us. It's
actually a sophisticated communication protocol NASA uses, but it
looks a lot like a fax when it's printed out.

We wait for a few seconds until we reach the ceiling. I push off,
hard, and we careen toward our clothing stash. When we arrive, Sara
grabs hold of the metal railing on the wall to stop us. I pull our
clothes out from under the bottom shelf. We hurry into our pants,
and we're doing the buttons on our shirts when the door slides open
and Ed pokes his head in.

"Oh, there you are. We've been looking for you. What - ah..." He
breaks into a sudden smile. "Don't you two have work to do? How
many times is that in the last week, anyway?"

Sara laughs. "Shut up."

"Ah, never mind." Ed grins. He bounces from one side of the door to
the other, barely able to contain himself. "Guess what? They say we
have to go outside once more. Ah! Ah! Hooray for outside!"

I'm surprised. "Are you sure? We don't have a walk scheduled. What
do they want us to do?"

"I didn't read that far," he shrugs, "but it shouldn't be a big
deal. Probably just shut some of the sensors and scientific stuff
off. Anyway, you should get suited up. We need to start soon."

Ed shoots out of the storage area. We hear him singing the
Gilligan's Island theme song before the door slides shut. He gets
about half of the notes right, and makes up lyrics when he doesn't
remember them. "The mate was a mighty physics geek, the mechanic
brave and sure / Our funding might get slashed this year, we'll all
be very poor..."

I finish buttoning my shirt and we head upstairs. When we reach the
airlock, Sara settles down in front of the observation window,
holding the metal handles on either side. She doesn't usually go
outside with us. She's more of a scientist than an astronaut, so
Jenn, Ed and I take care of the technical stuff.

Jenn and Ed are already in their full-body space suits. I rap on
their visors with my knuckles. They flash me a thumbs-up and I
struggle into my suit. I fasten my helmet and flip the power
switch, and I hear the spark of the heating coils and the hum of
the fan behind my head. A blast of air hits my chin as the oxygen
valve opens.

"You ready in there, cowboy?" The radio crackles and Ed's voice
fills my ears. I flash him a thumbs-up in return.

Jenn turns to look at Ed. The movement is exaggerated. Her entire
upper body twists, compensating for the bulk of the suit. "What's
the plan?"

"Ah..." He pauses, thinking. "The antenna needs to be adjusted so
ground control can set our descent path. The crane needs to be
disassembled and packed up. And...oh, that's right. We need to open
the thruster pods so we can steer if we need to."

He turns to me. "Bob, you want to do the antenna?" He gives me a
sly, sideways look. "I can hear it calling your name. But then
again, I'm fluent in radio wave."

I grin. The antenna is definitely the easiest job. Ed must be
giving me a break. He and Jenn know a lot more about the mechanical
stuff than me, and they have more walk time under their belts.

I press the radio button. "Sure," I say.

"The crane should take the longest time," he says. "I've got the
tools, so I might as well do it. You know how to open the
thrusters, Jenn?"

"Sure. Let's go!" Jenn sounds confident, impatient. She pulls open
the door to the airlock. We file in and I push it shut, sealing the
chamber. Jenn punches a button and the air hisses as it leaks out
of the room. Within minutes, the chamber is depressurized. She
spins the lock on the outer door until we hear it click. It swings
open, slowly.

Short of walking on the moon, doing a space walk is the most
romanticized part of being an astronaut. Whenever you see space
shuttles or astronauts on TV, they're always in their spacesuits,
working away outside the ship, with a harness cable trailing behind
them. Bullwhips, we call them. The only time I ever saw a clip of
astronauts inside the space shuttle - besides at the office, of
course - was a commercial for Freeze-Dried Astronaut Space Food.
Even then, it was just a shot of them eating, and the rest was
space suits and lunar landers.

Sadly, it doesn't live up to the hype. It's a rush the first few
times, when you realize there's nothing between you and the
emptiness of space except a few layers of rayon and fiberglass and
a thin metal cable to keep you from floating away. Spend enough
time outside and that suit gets to feel pretty flimsy, let me tell
you. But after five months of walks, you get desensitized.

We hook our cables to the post outside the door and head our
separate ways. Just like inside, the outside of the ship is covered
with metal handles so we can get to the equipment we need to work
on. I pull myself hand over hand underneath the shuttle until I
reach the main antenna. It's impossibly thin, and it extends about
ten feet below the belly of the ship at a slight angle. There are a
few other antennae in the wings and the tail of the shuttle that
bounce comm signals off satellites, but this is the only one that
receives flight data from ground control.

I tug on a rail and spin myself around so I can see the earth. The
thrill of space walks may have worn off, but that big blue and
green ball never ceases to amaze me. Even from this far up, its
sheer size is incredible. We take picture after picture while we're
topside, but they don't do it justice.

"You know what?" Jenn's voice fills my helmet, followed by a burst
of static. "I'm going to miss this place."

"What?" I laugh. "Was that a sniffle, R.S.? I thought they managed
to beat all the emotion out of you in flight training."

"Aw, shove it," she retorts. She tries to be serious, but a chuckle
slips out.

"You're right, though," I say. "I love it up here. It's hard to
convince myself I probably won't make it topside again. At least
you have more flights ahead of you."

"Yeah. It's also that...I don't know. It's nice to get away from
all the recruits and the desk geeks and the suits."

"Hey now," Ed chimes in. "Desk geeks like Bob I can understand, ah,
but we were all recruits once, remember!"

I stab the button. "Yeah, but at least I wasn't a grease monkey.
Which one would you rather go out with on a Saturday night, Jenn?"

"Neither of you, that's for sure!" She gives up trying to contain
her laughter. "Seriously, topside always makes me realize how much
shit I take for being female flight crew. I mean, Sara's a
scientist, she's just along for the ride, so she doesn't have to
deal with much of it. But some of the guys down there just don't
let up."

"C'mon, R.S.," I say. "Not all of us are like that. And even the
guys who are, they don't mean anything by it."

"I don't know," she replies. "Even the nice ones, I know they're
thinking it. A few of \`em, anyway. I can see it in their eyes."

"Yeah, but it'll change. I mean, they've been sending up men in
those shuttles for decades. Angie was the first woman, and she just
went through flight training, what, five years ago? Give the guys a
break."

"You better not be saying it's ok that they're assholes about it."

"No, that came out wrong. Um...I'm just saying, give them some time
to adjust."

"Whatever," she sighs. "I'm still not looking forward to it."

"You both got it all wrong," Ed interrupts. "It doesn't matter if
it's girls or guys up here. What happened to the chimps, ah? That
Russian launch with the monkey in '61, someone was off their
rocker, and they pulled it off! But now it's all humans, just so
NASA can get photo ops and good publicity. Ah! Where's the
adventure in that?"

We laugh. He continues, "Anyway, I'm about done. The crane's snug
as a bug in a rug. What about you two?"

I know Ed's a good mechanic, but I'm still surprised. I must have
been staring at the earth for longer than I thought.

"Finished," Jenn replies. "I'm heading in."

"Almost done," I say. I search for a minute to find the Americas,
and then the general area where Texas is. Funny how we think Texas
is so big, but from up here you can't even see it. Even the good
old U. S. of A. looks a little anemic from two hundred miles away.
I make an awkward gloved fist around the base of the antenna, above
the radar dish, and point it toward the Lone Star state. I let go
and the servomechanical motors kick in, moving the antenna to
pinpoint the massive radio towers at ground control.

I haul myself out from under the ship and move along the side until
I reach the outer airlock door. Jenn and Ed are already inside. I
pull my cable in behind me and unhook it from the outside post.
Jenn reaches to pull the door closed.

"Wait," Ed says. "I forgot to close the bay door. I'll be right
back."

He hooks his cable to the post and slips out the door. Jenn and I
look at each other and shrug. After a minute, we hear his voice
over the radio.

"Got it. Back in a sec."

The words are still echoing in our helmets when he appears at the
door. We can see him grinning through his visor. He closes the door
and spins the lock shut. Jenn hits the pressure button and we wait
for the chamber to fill with air. When the light on the panel turns
green, I push the inner door open. I unfasten my helmet and turn
the power off. I squirm out of my suit and head back to the
kitchen, Jenn and Ed following behind me.

Sara meets us in the banquet hall. "How'd it go?"

"Fine," Ed replies. His eyes are shining. "Nothing to it. We should
all be proud."

I launch myself into the kitchen and reach for a box of crackers.
Jenn opens the fridge and pulls out a bag of soda. Out of the
corner of my eye, I see something move outside the window. Ed's
eyes widen and his mouth opens in excitement. Jenn's jaw drops. Her
soda drifts out of her hand, forgotten. A few drops escape from the
bag and glide through the kitchen, serenely, as if they had the
entire shuttle to themselves. On the other side of the glass, less
than five feet from us, a line splits the window. We watch, frozen,
as it floats upward. An object on the end comes into view. It's
the radar dish, still attached to the antenna. Ed grins.

Sara's hand finds mine and squeezes, hard. "How are we going to-"

"Shh...," I say. I squeeze back. We watch the antenna float away in
silence. It is proud, stately, epic, grand. It is all of these and
more. The word escapes me. I watch it turn end over end, slowly,
and I imagine it calling back to the other gadgets on the shuttle.
It describes the white of the moon, the blue of the earth, the
blinding yellow of the sun. It sings the glory of the stars it can
see and the glory of the stars yet to come. It says, in a whisper
almost too soft to hear, that it is free.
