RYAN BARRETT

http://snarfed.org/
resume at ryanb dot org


SKILLS

* Distributed systems, structured storage, networking protocols, Linux,
  Python, Java, C++.
* Contributor to open source projects including OpenID, Emacs, Pine, tcsh,
  Pidgin, and PyBlosxom. More at http://snarfed.org/space/software.


EXPERIENCE

Google Inc.  Mountain View, CA
Software Engineer

*  March 2006 - present

Co-founder of Google App Engine and lead engineer on its datastore team. The
datastore is a large-scale, replicated, distributed structured storage system
used by both App Engine and other Google products. Includes a dynamic query
planner, full featured transaction engine, rich structured primary keys,
real-time index management, and semantic typing.

*  March 2006 - Dec. 2006

Led Google's early adoption of OpenID. Evangelized internally, built a number of
prototypes, addressed security concerns, and got buy-in from execs. Implemented
the first projects, commenting in Blogger and the App Engine provider and
consumer, and coordinated the Blogger OpenID provider. This led to widespread
adoption, culminating in a full Google Accounts provider and consumer.


*  Sept. 2005 - March 2006
Led the migration to BFS, our third party billing partner. This went beyond
the scope of the Fluffy migration (below); it included more advertisers and
publishers, multiple corporate entities, and over ten different billing
models and payment methods. We migrated all advertisers without downtime,
and with a fallout rate of under .1% needing manual intervention.

*  Sept. 2004 - Sept. 2005
Led the migration from Fluffy, Google's old biller and OLTP system, to
Moneta. We migrated millions of customers in-flight, without any downtime
and ahead of schedule. We had a fallout rate of under .01% needing manual
intervention.

*  June 2003 - April 2005
Tech lead and a primary developer on Moneta, Google's transaction processing
platform. Moneta handles OLTP, rating, billing, invoicing, payments, and
revenue share for all of our advertisers and publishers.

Designed the Moneta data model and wrote the biller, with another tech lead. It
went live in early 2005. It currently handles over ten payment methods, hundreds
of countries and currencies, millions of advertisers and publishers, millions of
requests per day, hundreds of millions of transactions per day, and billions of
dollars on roughly 30 minutes of downtime per quarter.

Moneta connects to multiple external payment processors, including
CyberSource, Bibit, OPI, GlobalCollect, and BFS. Their APIs include HTTPS,
XML-RPC, REST, proprietary, and batch flat file.

Moneta is also Google's primary customer master data store, and provides
online and batch access to all static and transactional data. It handles
financial reporting, data warehousing, and data mining.

IBM Almaden Research Center  San Jose, CA
Software Developer, Life Sciences
Sept. 2002 - June 2003
* Designed and implemented a workflow framework, catalog, and description
  language used to run molecular analyses.

IBM Extreme Blue  Almaden, CA
Software Developer, Life Sciences
June-Sept. 2002
* Worked on DALI, an Extreme Blue project that enables scientists to share
  molecule data and analysis code over the Internet. Used SOAP, OGSA, UDDI,
  DB2, and Java.
* Developed a dynamic parallelizing algorithm for running large networked
  analyses.
* Implemented intelligent caching and routing mechanisms for data and
  analyses.

LucasArts Entertainment Co.  San Rafael, CA
Software Developer, Bounty Hunter PS2
June-Sept. 2001
* Wrote a triangle re-optimizer and other tools for the graphics engine.
* Developed a full-featured windowing system in OpenGL for the game's GUI.
* Developed a multi-channel streaming audio library for Playstation 2.

Webvan Group  Foster City, CA
Software Developer, OFS
June-Sept. 2000
* Designed and implemented a networked warehouse management system using
  sensors, conveyor belts, bar code readers with custom TCP/IP stacks, and an
  Oracle server. Also wrote an automatically regressed emulator for the system.
* Wrote web-based PL/SQL utilities for modifying in-process orders on the fly.

Electronic Arts  Redwood Shores, CA
Quality Assurance Tester
June-Sept. 1999

MobileForce Technologies  San Ramon, CA
Software Developer
April-Sept. 1998


EDUCATION

Stanford University  Stanford, CA

* BS in Computer Science, with a minor in Mathematics, 6/2002, GPA 3.5
* MS in Computer Science, 6/2003, GPA 3.6
* Coursework: networking, distributed systems, security, streaming algorithms,
  advanced databases, operating systems, C/C++, Java, graphics, discrete math,
  abstract algebra
* Senior project: designed and implemented P4, a self-organizing
  peer-to-peer network with a generic, extensible platform for developing
  plugins. The project won top prizes from the IBM, Cisco, and Electronic
  Arts corporate sponsors.


OTHER

* Eagle Scout, Boy Scout Troop 120
* Classical Piano, under Geraldine Keeling, multiple competitions and concerts
* Black Belt, Hapkido Karate, Jang Moo
* Fluent in Spanish


